---
title: 'Notes of 15445 '
date: 2024-12-18T15:14:53+08:00
draft: true
author: Zijian Zang
UseHugoToc: true
tags: 
---

Notes of CMU Intro to Database Systems Fall 2022.

<!--more-->

Like most of the "first-class of ***" it talks about some things like background, histories or others. I will skip it.

## What is database

First thing to notice is the key tenets of relational models(which 15445 mainly focusing on):

- Store databse in simple datastructures(relations)
- Physical storage left up to the DBMS implementation.
- Access data through high-level language

And this is radical back in 60s when the paper is proposed that most for database users have to decide which data structure to use and how it's physically stored. In a modern DBMS this is customizable and can be toggled. The idea is abstraction.

The *relation* thing is important. Let's say a `Album(id, name, year)` table and a `Artist(id, name, year)`. How to build a multi-to-multi relationship between Album and Artist? Set the identity id -- *primary key* of two tables and refer them in a new table `ArtistAlbum(artist_id, album_id)`. By doing so you build a undirected graph and store them in a sequencial table.

The original design of relational database says you don't need to store arrays in an attribute. Right or not, the idea comes from that array can be treated as multimap, as relations. You can create a new relation table like `ArtistAlbum` to handle this.

And by using reference the consistency between tables is ensured. If you simply add an attribute of `Artist` in a tuple data of an Album, there's no guarantee that the Artist is *legal*, which means it's in the Artist table. And even it's in the Artist table currently, once you want to remove it, it takes a huge amount of time to check each table that all relevant info is deleted.

## Relational Algebra

To manipulate relational database, first we need a *data manipulation language*. It can be *procedural* (like a program) or declarative (specifies what we want). Most cases we use *procedural* one, typically *sql*, so we skip all the rest part and it's details.

The manipulation itself is based on fundamental operations in *relational algebra*, which is based on set algebra. The operations can be chained together to formed a complex manipulation.

### SELECT $\sigma$

$\sigma_{predicate}({R})$ is the select operator. It means select the tuple from relation $R$ which satisfies the $predicate$. On a table `R(a_id, b_id)` you can operate $\sigma_{a\_id='a2'}(R)$, which means select all tuples whose `a_id` attribute is `'a2'`. In sql it looks like:

```sql
SELECT * FROM R
WHERE a_id='a2'
```

### PROJECTION $\pi$

Projection $\pi_{A_1, A_2,..., A_n}(R)$ generate a relation with tuples that contains only the specified attributes. It can rearrange attributes and manipulate the values. For example $\pi_{b_id-100, a_id}(\sigma_{a_id='a2'}(R))$

### UNION $\cup$

Union $R\cup S$ simply expand one set with another. We got `UNION ALL` in sql.

```sql
SELECT * FROM R
UNION ALL
SELECT * FROM S
```

Single `UNION` removes the duplication and `UNION ALL` does not.

### INTERSECTION $\cap$

Intersaction keeps the tuples which in both two tables.

```sql
SELECT * FROM R
INTERSECT
SELECT * FROM S
```

### DIFFERENCE $-$

$R-S$ generates a table with tuples in R and not in S. And we got `EXCEPT` keyword in sql

```sql
SELECT * FROM R
EXCEPT
SELECT * FROM S
```

### PRODUCT $\times$

$R \times S$ generates a relation that contains all possible combinations of tuples from the input relations. The table that each tupe comes from will be marked, and each tuple will be matched up with all the other tuples in the other table. *The source of each attribute will be kept*. `R(a_id,b_id)` and `S(a_id, b_id)` will output a table of `RS(R.a_id, R.b_id, S.a_id, S.b_id)`. Product is the base of join.

```sql
SELECT * FROM R CROSS JOIN S
```

### JOIN $\bowtie$

$R\bowtie S$ will generate a relation that contains all tuples that are combination of two tuples (one from each input relation) with a common value for one or more attributes. Let's say we got

R:

| a_id | b_id |
| ---- | ---- |
| 1    | 100  |
| 2    | 101  |

and S

| a_id | b_id |
| ---- | ---- |
| 1    | 100  |
| 3    | 102  |

$R \bowtie S$ will produce

| a_id | b_id |
| ---- | ---- |
| 1    | 100  |

quiet similar to intersaction, but the difference lies that JOIN do not require that the schema of two relations to be the same. You can specifiy the attribute to apply. For example

```sql
SELECT * FROM R JOIN S USING (a_id);
```

will combining tuples in two relations with same `a_id`, and keep the rest part untouched. The `R \bowtie S` we show above is more like

```sql
SELECT * FROM R JOIN S USING (a_id, b_id);
```

## SQL

All these relational operators define high level steps. Sometimes we want to ignore the order of the steps, using a more high-level abstraction that hides all caculation optimizations. That's why we need sql.

Although the relational model is *independent* of any query language, SQL is the *de facto* standard.

The details of sql will be talked about in the next class.
