---
title: '154452022fall_2'
date: 2024-12-20T18:56:48+08:00
draft: true
author: Zijian Zang
UseHugoToc: true
tags: 
 - database
---

Notes of CMU Intro to Database Systems Fall 2022.

<!--more-->

Before talking about the relational language, or query language, we have to know that one of the key idea of sql is that *user don't have to specify how to compute the relation*. User is only required to give the description of what they want. One example is shown is the formal passage.

So we say sql is *descriptive* and sophiscated optimizer is set on the backend of DBMS.

Sql is mainly based on *bag* algorithms instead of *set* algorithm, which means it allows for duplicates. One of the reason is *efficiency*.

## Aggregations + Group By

**Aggregations** are functions that return a single value from a bag of tuples. The sql 92 standard defines five fundamental aggregations: `AVG(col)`, `MIN(col)`, `MAX(col)`, `SUM(col)`, `COUNT(col)`. Aggregate functions can (almost) only be used in `SELECT`. We can do multiple aggregates in one statement.

`COUNT`, `SUM`, `AVG` support `DISTINCT`.

And let's see what `GROUP BY` is used for. The statement below, seems to calculate the `gpa` for each class, will actually mix all gpas of classes together.

```sql
SELECT AVG(s.gpa), e.cid
FROM enrolled as e, student as s
WHERE e.sid = s.sid
```

So in order to get the gpa for *each* class, you have to add a `GROUP BY` below.

```sql
SELECT AVG(s.gpa), e.cid
FROM enrolled as e, student as s
WHERE e.sid = s.sid
GROUP BY e.cid
```

Non-aggregated values in `SELECT` output clause must appear in `GROUP BY` clause.

To set conditions on the aggregated values, use `HAVING` after `WHERE` instead of `WHERE ... AND ...`.

```sql
SELECT AVG(s.gpa) as avg_gpa, e.cid
FROM enrolled as e, student as s
WHERE e.sid = s.sid
GROUP BY e.cid
HAVING avg_gpa > 3.9
```

## String operations

Interestingly, different DBMS handles string differently. For example, in mysql string is *insensitive*. Standard says using `||` to concatenate strings but rare DBMS follow this (sqlite and postgres do and mysql does not).

`LIKE` is used for string matching. Instead of `*` sql use `%` to match any substring, and `_` for one character.

## Output Control

We got `ORDER BY` and `LIMIT`. Simple so skip them.

## Nested Queries

We can embed a query in another, or more since the output of query is a table.

```sql
SELECT name FROM student 
WHERE sid IN (SELECT sid FROM enrolled)
```

The nesting level is arbitrary. One more example, if we want to get the names of students in '15-445'

```sql
SELECT name FROM student
WHERE sid in (
    SELECT sid FROM enrolled
    WHERE cid = '15-445'
)
```

We got several keywords for nested queries, they are `ALL`, `ANY`, `IN`, `EXISTS`. For example,`IN` is equvilent to `=ANY()`.

```sql
SELECT name FROM student
WHERE sid = ANY(
    SELECT sid FROM enrolled
    WHERE cid = '15-445'
)
```

And there's a trick using nested queries. Sometimes we want to get the MAX(something) and the corresponding row, but

```sql
SELECT MAX(something), another FROM ...
```

is invalid. It will either throw an error or behave unexpectedly -- the `another` may not related to the former attribute. What we really do is

```sql
SELECT sid, name FROM student
WHERE sid IN (
    SELECT MAX(sid) FROM enrolled
)
```

or `ORDER BY` with `LIMIT 1`. Inner query can reference the table in outer query.
